Component (#1823)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/reference/components/prometheus/prometheus.remote.queue.md

Reviewer: It'd be nice to add a bit more info on how `prometheus.remote.queue` is different from `prometheus.remote_write`, and when to use what component.

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/prometheus/prometheus.remote.queue/
aliases:
  - ../prometheus.remote.queue/ # /docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/prometheus.remote.queue/
description: Learn about prometheus.remote.queue
title: prometheus.remote.queue
---

# prometheus.remote.queue

`prometheus.remote.queue` collects metrics sent from other components into a
Write-Ahead Log (WAL) and forwards them over the network to a series of
user-supplied endpoints. Metrics are sent over the network using the
[Prometheus Remote Write protocol][remote_write-spec].

> Multiple `prometheus.remote.queue` components can be specified by giving them
> different labels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can specify multiple `prometheus.remote.queue` components by giving them different labels.
```

The following arguments are supported:

Name | Type | Description | Default | Required
---- | ---- | ----------- | ------- | --------
`url` | `string` | Full URL to send metrics to. | | yes
`name` | `string` | Optional name to identify the endpoint in metrics. | | no
`write_timeout` | `duration` | Timeout for requests made to the URL. | `"30s"` | no
`retry_backoff` | `duration` | How often to wait between retries. | `1s` | no
`max_retry_backoff_attempts` | Maximum number of retries before dropping the batch. | `1s` | no
`batch_count` | `uint` | How many series to queue in each queue. | `1,000` | no
`flush_frequency` | `duration` | How often to wait until sending if `batch_count` is not trigger. | `1s` | no
`queue_count` | `uint` | How many concurrent batches to write. | 10 | no
`external_labels` | `map(string)` | Labels to add to metrics sent over the network. | | no

### basic_auth block

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/basic-auth-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

## Exported fields

The following fields are exported and can be referenced by other components:

Name | Type | Description
---- | ---- | -----------

> `receiver` | `MetricsReceiver` | A value which other components can use to send metrics to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`receiver` | `MetricsReceiver` | A value that other components can use to send metrics to.
```

## Component health

`prometheus.remote.queue` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid
configuration. In those cases, exported fields are kept at their last healthy
values.

## Debug information

`prometheus.remote_write` does not expose any component-specific debug
information.

## Debug metrics

> The below metrics are provided for backwards compatibility, they behave generally the same but there are likely
> edge cases where they differ.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following metrics are provided for backward compatibility.
They generally behave the same, but there are likely edge cases where they differ.
```

* `prometheus_remote_storage_exemplars_failed_total` (counter): Total number of
  exemplars that failed to send to remote storage due to non-recoverable errors.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_metadata_failed_total` (counter): Total number of
  metadata entries that failed to send to remote storage due to
  non-recoverable errors.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_samples_retries_total` (counter): Total number of
  samples that failed to send to remote storage but were retried due to
  recoverable errors.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_exemplars_retried_total` (counter): Total number of
  exemplars that failed to send to remote storage but were retried due to
  recoverable errors.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_metadata_retried_total` (counter): Total number of
  metadata entries that failed to send to remote storage but were retried due
  to recoverable errors.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_samples_dropped_total` (counter): Total number of
  samples which were dropped after being read from the WAL before being sent to
  remote_write because of an unknown reference ID.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_exemplars_dropped_total` (counter): Total number

>   of exemplars which were dropped after being read from the WAL before being

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  of exemplars that were dropped after being read from the WAL before being
```

### Send metrics to a local Mimir instance

You can create a `prometheus.remote.queue` component that sends your metrics to a local Mimir instance:

```alloy
prometheus.remote.queue "staging" {
  // Send metrics to a locally running Mimir.
  endpoint "mimir" {
    url = "http://mimir:9009/api/v1/push"

    basic_auth {
      username = "example-user"
      password = "example-password"
    }
  }
}

// Configure a prometheus.scrape component to send metrics to
// prometheus.remote_write component.
prometheus.scrape "demo" {
  targets = [
    // Collect metrics from the default HTTP listen address.
    {"__address__" = "127.0.0.1:12345"},
  ]
  forward_to = [prometheus.remote.queue.staging.receiver]
}

```

## TODO Metadata settings

## Technical details

`prometheus.remote.queue` uses [snappy][] for compression.
`prometheus.remote.queue` sends native histograms by default.
Any labels that start with `__` will be removed before sending to the endpoint.

### Data retention

Data is written to disk in blocks utilizing [snappy][] compression. These blocks are read on startup and resent if they are still within the TTL. 

> Any data that has not been written to disk, or that is in the network queues is lost if Alloy is restarted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any data that has not been written to disk, or that is in the network queues is lost if {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} is restarted.
```

### Retries

Network errors will be retried. 429 errors will be retried. 5XX errors will retry. Any other non-2XX return codes will not be tried. 

### Memory

`prometheus.remote.queue` is meant to be memory efficient. By adjusting the `max_signals_to_batch`, `queue_count`, and `batch_size` the amount of memory
can be controlled. A higher `max_signals_to_batch` allows for more efficient disk compression. A higher `queue_count` allows more concurrent writes and `batch_size`

> allows more data sent at one time. This can allow greater throughput, at the cost of more memory on both Alloy and the endpoint. The defaults are good for most 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allows more data sent at one time. This can allow greater throughput, at the cost of more memory on both {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and the endpoint. The defaults are good for most 
```

  pending in shards to be sent to remote storage.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_exemplars_pending` (gauge): The number of
  exemplars pending in shards to be sent to remote storage.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_samples_in_total` (counter): Samples read into
  remote storage.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_exemplars_in_total` (counter): Exemplars read into
  remote storage.

Metrics that are new to `prometheus.remote.write`. These are highly subject to change.

* `alloy_queue_series_serializer_incoming_signals` (counter): Total number of series written to serialization.
* `alloy_queue_metadata_serializer_incoming_signals` (counter): Total number of metadata written to serialization.
* `alloy_queue_series_serializer_incoming_timestamp_seconds` (gauge): Highest timestamp of incoming series.
* `alloy_queue_series_serializer_errors` (gauge): Number of errors for series written to serializer.
* `alloy_queue_metadata_serializer_errors` (gauge): Number of errors for metadata written to serializer.
* `alloy_queue_series_network_timestamp_seconds` (gauge): Highest timestamp written to an endpoint.
* `alloy_queue_series_network_sent` (counter): Number of series sent successfully.

> * `alloy_queue_metadata_network_sent` (counter): Number of metadata sent successful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `alloy_queue_metadata_network_sent` (counter): Number of metadata sent successfully.
```

```alloy
prometheus.remote.queue "staging" {
  // Send metrics to a locally running Mimir.
  endpoint "mimir" {
    url = "http://mimir:9009/api/v1/push"

    basic_auth {
      username = "example-user"
      password = "example-password"
    }
  }
}

// Configure a prometheus.scrape component to send metrics to
// prometheus.remote_write component.
prometheus.scrape "demo" {
  targets = [
    // Collect metrics from the default HTTP listen address.
    {"__address__" = "127.0.0.1:12345"},
  ]
  forward_to = [prometheus.remote.queue.staging.receiver]
}

```

## TODO Metadata settings

## Technical details

`prometheus.remote.queue` uses [snappy][] for compression.
`prometheus.remote.queue` sends native histograms by default.
Any labels that start with `__` will be removed before sending to the endpoint.

### Data retention

Data is written to disk in blocks utilizing [snappy][] compression. These blocks are read on startup and resent if they are still within the TTL. 
Any data that has not been written to disk, or that is in the network queues is lost if {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} is restarted.

### Retries

> Network errors will be retried. 429 errors will be retried. 5XX errors will retry. Any other non-2XX return codes will not be tried. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`prometheus.remote.queue`  will retry sending data if the following errors or HTTP status codes are returned:

 * Network errors. 
 * HTTP 429 error.s 
 * HTTP 5XX errors.
 
`prometheus.remote.queue`  will  not retry sending data if any other unsuccessful status codes are returned. 
```

I tried to be more explicit what was happening. The original implied that the errors are retried when what was really meant was a retry happens if the 429 and 5xx status codes are returned.

For the network errors... does this mean network errors in general?

Author: Network errors are specific to transport errors, ie where you dont get a response.

### Memory

> `prometheus.remote.queue` is meant to be memory efficient. By adjusting the `max_signals_to_batch`, `queue_count`, and `batch_size` the amount of memory
> can be controlled. A higher `max_signals_to_batch` allows for more efficient disk compression. A higher `queue_count` allows more concurrent writes and `batch_size`
> allows more data sent at one time. This can allow greater throughput, at the cost of more memory on both {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and the endpoint. The defaults are good for most 
> common usages. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`prometheus.remote.queue` is meant to be memory efficient.
You can adjust the `max_signals_to_batch`, `queue_count`, and `batch_size` to control how much memory is used.
A higher `max_signals_to_batch` allows for more efficient disk compression.
A higher `queue_count` allows more concurrent writes, and `batch_size` allows more data sent at one time.
This can allow greater throughput at the cost of more memory on both {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and the endpoint.
The defaults are suitable for most common usages. 
```

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/prometheus/prometheus.remote.queue/
description: Learn about prometheus.remote.queue
title: prometheus.remote.queue
---

<span class="badge docs-labels__stage docs-labels__item">Experimental</span>

> # prometheus.remote.queue

Reviewer 3: I know it may be late to the partey, but what do you think of `prometheus.write.queue`?
We have `loki.write`, `pyroscope.write`... to me it seems a good idea to use `prometheus.write.*` prefix and then we can have a `prometheus.write.sync` for maybe an implementation that writes synchronously without a WAL (can be useful for gateway scenario) and the current `prometheus.write.queue` that uses a queue....

Author: I dont have problem with that @ptodev @wildum thoughts? Seems to match better with our current standard so sounds legit.

Author: I like this better, and going to do it unless we get strong objection :)

Reviewer: `prometheus.write.queue` sounds better to me too.

Author: Doing a rename here and will do the import changes in a separate PR I will automerge since it generates a lot of noise.

`prometheus.remote.queue` collects metrics sent from other components into a
Write-Ahead Log (WAL) and forwards them over the network to a series of
user-supplied endpoints. Metrics are sent over the network using the
[Prometheus Remote Write protocol][remote_write-spec].

You can specify multiple `prometheus.remote.queue` components by giving them different labels.

You should consider everything here extremely experimental and highly subject to change.

> [emote_write-spec]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LPhVRSFkGNSuU1fBd81ulhsCPR4hkSZyyBj1SZ8fWOM/edit

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[remote_write-spec]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LPhVRSFkGNSuU1fBd81ulhsCPR4hkSZyyBj1SZ8fWOM/edit
```

  

## Usage

```alloy
prometheus.remote.queue "LABEL" {
  endpoint "default "{
    url = REMOTE_WRITE_URL

    ...
  }

  ...
}
```

## Arguments

The following arguments are supported:

Name | Type | Description | Default | Required
---- | ---- | ----------- | ------- | --------

> `ttl` | `time` | `duration` | How long the timestamp of a signal is valid before the signal is discarded. | `2h` | no

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ttl` | `time` | `duration` | How long the samples can be queued for before they are discarded. | `2h` | no
```

## Blocks

The following blocks are supported inside the definition of
`prometheus.remote.queue`:

Hierarchy | Block | Description | Required
--------- | ----- | ----------- | --------
serialization | [serialization][] | Configuration for serializing and writing to disk | no
endpoint | [endpoint][] | Location to send metrics to. | no
endpoint > basic_auth | [basic_auth][] | Configure basic_auth for authenticating to the endpoint. | no

The `>` symbol indicates deeper levels of nesting. For example, `endpoint >
basic_auth` refers to a `basic_auth` block defined inside an
`endpoint` block.

[endpoint]: #endpoint-block
[basic_auth]: #basic_auth-block
[serialization]: #serialization-block

> ### serialization block

Reviewer 3: How about calling this `persistence` instead? Serialisation is just the process of encoding data in some format. But here we are configuring more than that - it's disk persistence / durability / storage or something like that.

Author: Seems reasonable

The `serialization` block describes how often and at what limits to write to disk. Serialization settings
are shared for each `endpoint.`

The following arguments are supported:

Name | Type | Description | Default | Required
---- | ---- | ----------- | ------- | --------
`max_signals_to_batch` | `uint` | The maximum number of signals before they are batched to disk. | `10,000` | no

> `batch_frequency` | `duration` | How often to batch signals to disk if `max_signals_to_batch` is not reached. | no

Reviewer 3: Why do we use `signals` as a name? maybe it should be samples? or is this to encompass histograms samples too? I'm not sure if that's a right name. In current remote_write we call this 'metrics' which makes sense although it's not very precise: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/next/reference/components/prometheus/prometheus.remote_write/#wal-block

Author: Subsequent PR will enable metadata storage, so I wanted it to not be just metrics. Sample is to narrow, open to better names here.

Reviewer 3: maybe 'entries'? that would be a generic name for things inside a queue.

> `batch_frequency` | `duration` | How often to batch signals to disk if `max_signals_to_batch` is not reached. | no

Reviewer 4: it's a duration, the default is 5s

### endpoint block

The `endpoint` block describes a single location to send metrics to. Multiple
`endpoint` blocks can be provided to send metrics to multiple locations. Each
`endpoint` will have its own WAL folder

The following arguments are supported:

Name | Type | Description | Default | Required
---- | ---- | ----------- | ------- | --------
`url` | `string` | Full URL to send metrics to. | | yes

> `name` | `string` | Optional name to identify the endpoint in metrics. | | no

Author: Actually I can remove this since its the label name.

`write_timeout` | `duration` | Timeout for requests made to the URL. | `"30s"` | no
`retry_backoff` | `duration` | How often to wait between retries. | `1s` | no

> `max_retry_backoff_attempts` | Maximum number of retries before dropping the batch. | `1s` | no

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`max_retry_backoff_attempts` | `uint`  |Maximum number of retries before dropping the batch. | `1` | no
```
Something is not right here...

> `max_retry_backoff_attempts` | Maximum number of retries before dropping the batch. | `1s` | no

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`max_retry_attempts` | Maximum number of retries before dropping the batch. | `1s` | no
```
not sure why add backoff here?

> `batch_count` | `uint` | How many series to queue in each queue. | `1,000` | no

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`batch_count` | `uint` | How many series to queue in each queue. | `1000` | no
```

> `flush_frequency` | `duration` | How often to wait until sending if `batch_count` is not trigger. | `1s` | no

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`flush_interval` | `duration` | How often to wait until sending if `batch_count` is not trigger. | `1s` | no
```

frequency is `1/interval` and would be in Hz

Author: We use both interval and frequency all over the configuration. The original remote_write uses both, but both use the verbiage frequency/frequent to describe the value so it felt better. 

remote write below
`truncate_frequency` | `duration` | How frequently to clean up the WAL. | `"2h"` | no
`send_interval` | `duration` | How frequently metric metadata is sent to the endpoint. | `"1m"` | no

Reviewer 3: haha, I see... well, we can improve on that, but I guess it's a nit

Reviewer 2: Either way works if it's consistent with upstream and within Alloy.  But... we can look at the top level definitions...

* frequency... is the rate something happens or the number of times something happens within a given time period
* interval... is a measurable time between things or events

So what are we providing? A fixed time.. for example, 30 seconds? Then it's an interval. if it's something like like 150/hour then it's a frequency.  

In this case... I'd probably opt to go with 

```suggestion
`flush_interval` | `duration` | How long to wait until sending if `batch_count` is not triggered. | `1s` | no
```

> `queue_count` | `uint` | How many concurrent batches to write. | 10 | no

Author: Parallelism is likely the more accurate word in both the name and verbiage. How do you feel about that?

`parallelism` | `uint` | How many parrallel batches to write. | 10 | no

> `queue_count` | `uint` | How many concurrent batches to write. | 10 | no

Reviewer 3: yep! that sounds good to me

> `external_labels` | `map(string)` | Labels to add to metrics sent over the network. | | no

Author: Its how remote write defines it, so its easier to grok. I dont have a strong preference though

> `external_labels` | `map(string)` | Labels to add to metrics sent over the network. | | no

Reviewer 3: ok, I'll leave it up to you, hard to tell whether it's worth using better phrasing with a cost of potentially tripping some users who got used to old names

### basic_auth block

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/basic-auth-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

## Exported fields

The following fields are exported and can be referenced by other components:

Name | Type | Description
---- | ---- | -----------
`receiver` | `MetricsReceiver` | A value that other components can use to send metrics to.

## Component health

`prometheus.remote.queue` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid
configuration. In those cases, exported fields are kept at their last healthy
values.

## Debug information

> `prometheus.remote_write` does not expose any component-specific debug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`prometheus.remote.queue` does not expose any component-specific debug
```

* `alloy_queue_network_metadata_failed` (counter): Number of metadata failed.
* `alloy_queue_network_series_retried` (counter): Number of series retried due to network issues.
* `alloy_queue_network_metadata_retried` (counter): Number of metadata retried due to network issues.
* `alloy_queue_network_series_retried_429` (counter): Number of series retried due to status code 429.
* `alloy_queue_network_metadata_retried_429` (counter): Number of metadata retried due to status code 429.
* `alloy_queue_network_series_retried_5xx` (counter): Number of series retried due to status code 5xx.
* `alloy_queue_network_metadata_retried_5xx` (counter): Number of metadata retried due to status code 5xx.
* `alloy_queue_network_series_network_duration_seconds` (histogram): Duration writing series to endpoint.
* `alloy_queue_network_metadata_network_duration_seconds` (histogram): Duration writing metadata to endpoint.
* `alloy_queue_network_series_network_errors` (counter): Number of errors writing series to network.
* `alloy_queue_network_metadata_network_errors` (counter): Number of errors writing metadata to network.

## Examples

> The following examples show you how to create `prometheus.remote_write` components that send metrics to different destinations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples show you how to create `prometheus.remote.queue` components that send metrics to different destinations.
```

### Send metrics to a local Mimir instance

You can create a `prometheus.remote.queue` component that sends your metrics to a local Mimir instance:

```alloy
prometheus.remote.queue "staging" {
  // Send metrics to a locally running Mimir.
  endpoint "mimir" {
    url = "http://mimir:9009/api/v1/push"

    basic_auth {
      username = "example-user"
      password = "example-password"
    }
  }
}

// Configure a prometheus.scrape component to send metrics to

> // prometheus.remote_write component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// prometheus.remote.queue component.
```

prometheus.scrape "demo" {
  targets = [
    // Collect metrics from the default HTTP listen address.
    {"__address__" = "127.0.0.1:12345"},
  ]
  forward_to = [prometheus.remote.queue.staging.receiver]
}

```

> ## TODO Metadata settings

Author: It requires scrape changes, I will remove the todo, metadata support is down the line.

## Technical details

`prometheus.remote.queue` uses [snappy][] for compression.
`prometheus.remote.queue` sends native histograms by default.
Any labels that start with `__` will be removed before sending to the endpoint.

### Data retention

Data is written to disk in blocks utilizing [snappy][] compression. These blocks are read on startup and resent if they are still within the TTL. 
Any data that has not been written to disk, or that is in the network queues is lost if {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} is restarted.

### Retries

`prometheus.remote.queue`  will retry sending data if the following errors or HTTP status codes are returned:

 * Network errors. 

>  * HTTP 429 error.s 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * HTTP 429 errors. 
```

Ooops.. transposed the full stop and the last letter in the suggestion, this fixes it.
